1. Project Purpose

In high-traffic e-commerce systems, race conditions (such as two users buying the last item simultaneously) can lead to data inconsistencies like double-selling inventory or charging customers for failed orders.

The purpose of this project is to implement a consistent, containerized, and ACID-compliant E-commerce Order API that ensures absolute data integrity. It guarantees that inventory levels are accurate, operations are safe from concurrent interference, and failures gracefully revert all modified states.

2. Technical Stack: How Each Technology Helps

PostgreSQL (Database): 
Relational database that natively supports full ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) transactions, row-level locking, and schema check constraints (e.g., checking that stock >= 0).

Knex.js (SQL Query Builder & Migrations): 
Builds clean SQL queries inside TypeScript, manages database connection pools, compiles database schema migrations, and facilitates transactions (trx.commit(), trx.rollback()) and pessimistic locking (.forUpdate()).

TypeScript (Language): 
Provides compile-time type safety. It ensures request schemas (like CreateOrderInput or OrderItemInput) are strictly typed, reducing runtime issues.

Express.js (Web Framework): 
Handles HTTP routing, middleware processing, validation error filtering, and global error handling.

Docker & Docker Compose: 
Containerizes both the database and application. Using Docker's depends_on with service_healthy conditions guarantees the database is fully initialized, migrated, and seeded before the application server begins accepting HTTP requests.

Winston (Structured Logger): 
Outputs logs in structured JSON format. This allows developers to monitor logs for database operations, transaction commits, rollbacks, and optimistic locking concurrency conflicts.

3. Implementation of Key Functionalities

A. Health Check (GET /health)
How it is implemented: Inside app.ts, a light query SELECT 1 is run against PostgreSQL.

Purpose: Allows external tools (like Docker's healthcheck) to verify that the app is connected to the database and ready to receive traffic.

B. Product Catalog (GET /api/products)

How it is implemented: Queries the products table using Knex in productController.ts.

Purpose: Fetches up-to-date item prices and stock values, parsing PostgreSQL decimals into float numbers.

C. Create Order (POST /api/orders) — Atomic Transaction & Optimistic Locking

How it is implemented: Written inside orderService.ts:

Opens a database transaction: const trx = await db.transaction().
Verifies the user exists, and checks if there is sufficient stock for all requested items.
Optimistic Locking:
Products have a version column (starts at 0). When checking the stock, the system reads the product's current version.

During the update, it executes:

sql
UPDATE products SET stock = :newStock, version = version + 1 
WHERE id = :productId AND version = :currentVersion;

If another concurrent order successfully completed first, the database version would have changed. This query will update 0 rows.
The application detects affectedRows === 0, throws a concurrency exception, rolls back the entire transaction, and returns a 400 Bad Request suggesting the user retry.
If version matching succeeds, it inserts the records into orders, order_items, and records a "succeeded" payment inside payments.
Commits the transaction. If any error occurs during these steps, trx.rollback() is executed, ensuring no database modifications persist.

D. Cancel Order (PUT /api/orders/:orderId/cancel) — Pessimistic locking & Idempotency

How it is implemented: Written inside orderService.ts:

Opens a transaction.
Pessimistic Row Locking: Selects the order row with a lock (SELECT ... FOR UPDATE via .forUpdate()). If another thread is trying to cancel the same order simultaneously, it blocks and waits.
Idempotency Check: If the locked order record has a status of "cancelled", the system commits the transaction without making any changes and returns success.
If the order is active, its status is changed to "cancelled", and inventory is incremented back for each item in the order.
Commits the transaction and releases the row lock.